---
layout: post
title: From undergrad to PhD -- How my research interests evolved!
permalink: _posts/:year/:month/:day/:title/
---

My PhD project involves using molecular simulations to study ion transport in membranes. Most likely, my future work profile would be centered around molecular simulations. Therefore, in this blog post today, I would share my thoughts on how I ended up chosing this field of work -- a gentle mix of decisions driven by both naviety and genuine interest in the topic.

From what I recall, it was a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) workshop that I attended during my sophomore year that stoked my interest in computational work. Other than the wonderful insights that CFD simulation offered in a simple flow in a pipe system, there was another sight that were to remain forever etched in my memory, or till date for the least. There was a fellow student guiding one of the faculty members on creating the geometries in Ansys Design Modeler (DM). That faculy member was our instructor of a very rigrous course -- Engineering Drawing (ED). We used to spend nights to come up with okayish techincal drawings which would fetch average grades. The Ansys DM was offering a way to create drawing that had very little to do with the skillful hands of that instructor or any other student who was good with ED. I saw this software as a leveler. Later I would learn that AutoCAD and not Ansys DM is the suitable software, and more importantly, that the concepts learned in ED course were in no way obsolete. However, I was convinced that computational tools are indepsnsible in any field and building a career around those would be both exciting and rewarding.

In the subsequent years, I would study the computational courses with great zeam, from excitedly writing a C code on Newton-Raphson method to doing a project using the Image Processing Tool of MATLAB. Eventually, I managed to find an MS position which involved a CFD-based project on modeling the flow of ammonia in a microchannel. While doing this project, I realized that CFD is not the best tool to study these kind problems as there would be limited insights into the reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen and just modeling the fluid dynamics will not suffice. More so, fluid dynamics was not my primary interest anymore. I was more keen about the molecular level interactions, than studying the systems under continuum approximation. My naive self also thought that the molecular interactions would be all that is needed in knowing whatever we need to know about a given system. 

A few months and numerous grad school applications later, I began my work with Prof. Sapna Sarupria on a project involving molecular simulations of seawater desalination membranes. I am working on simulating the ion path inside the membrane pores in sub-nm domain.The insights gained will help achive better salt rejection. While the simulations at this scale will help finding the answer to my currenr research question, this technique will not suffice in know all we need to know about water filters. There would be other models (including CFD based models) that would be needed to simulate the flows at bigger scales, and quantum simulations at more smaller scales. A complete understanding for any system would eventually need multi-scale modeling. 

While working on my current problem statement which only need molecular simulations, a deep dive in the literature coupled with the training I received in molecular simulations has cemented my interest in this field. In future, I am excited to gain newer insights into various phenomena in the field of material science and/or biomolecular engineering, while actively developing related software tools. Unless I find myself writing another blog post explaining my switch to yet another field :)  
    
